Background: Genetic and environmental risk contribute to autism spectrum disorder (ASD). Emerging evidence suggests DNA methylation, which can be associated with both genetic and environmental variation, may play a role in ASD. Few autism studies have considered prospective designs with DNA methylation measured in multiple tissues.

Objectives: To estimate associations between DNA methylation in maternal blood, cord blood, and placenta and later diagnosis of ASD, and to evaluate enrichment of ASD-associated DNA methylation for known ASD-associated genes.

Methods: In the Early Autism Risk Longitudinal Investigation (EARLI), an ASD-enriched risk birth cohort, genome-scale maternal blood (early n=140 and late n=75 pregnancy), infant cord blood (n=133), and placenta (maternal n=106 and fetal n=107 compartments) DNA methylation was assessed on the Illumina 450k HumanMethylation array and compared to ASD diagnosis at 36 months of age. Differences in site-specific and global methylation were tested with ASD, as well as enrichment of single site associations for ASD risk genes (n=881) from the Simons Foundation Autism Research Initiative (SFARI) database.

Results: No individual DNA methylation site was associated with ASD at genome-wide significance, however individual DNA methylation sites nominally associated with ASD (P<0.05) in each tissue were highly enriched for SFARI genes (cord blood P = 7.9x10-29, maternal blood early pregnancy P = 6.1x10-27, maternal blood late pregnancy P = 2.8x10-16, maternal placenta P= 5.6x10-15, fetal placenta P = 1.3x10-20). DNA methylation sites nominally associated with ASD across all five tissues overlapped at 144 (29.5%) SFARI genes.

Conclusion: Across multiple tissues, DNA methylation sites nominally associated with later ASD diagnosis were enriched for ASD risk genes. Our multi-tissue study demonstrates the utility of examining DNA methylation prior to ASD diagnosis.
